# Objective

To learn about `HashMap`:

- What is an _associative_ collection?
- How to add keys and values.
- How to look up keys to get values.

We'll also practice working with `ArrayList`.


# Setup

This repo contains some Java source and an IntelliJ project in `projects/2015-03-28`.  Please _open_ (not import) this project directory in IntelliJ.


# Maps

A _map_ is a collection that associates _keys_ with _values_.

Some examples of maps:

- For each planet in the solar system, the number of moons.
- For each U.S. state, the state capital.
- For each student in Access Code, his/her birthday.
- For registered voters, whether each voted in the last election.

For example, I tell you a state, you tell me its capital.  Or, I tell you a planet, you tell me how many moons it has.  You can think of a map as a table with two columns, like so:

| key = Planet | value = # Moons |
|:--|--:|
| Mercury | 0 |
| Venus | 0 |
| Earth | 1 |
| Mars | 2 |
| Jupiter | 67 |
| Saturn | 62 | 
| Uranus | 27 | 
| Neptune | 14 |

The left column contains _keys_; the right, _values_.  We say it _maps keys to values_, in this case maps planets to numbers of moons.

To look something up in a map, look down the key column until you find the row that matches.  Once you do, read off the value in the column to its right.  If you don't find the entry you need in the key column, for example if you try to look up Pluto, the lookup fails and there is no value.

Something facts about maps:

- The keys are all the same type.

- The values are all the same type.

- The keys and values don't have to be the same types (though they may be).

- Any key can appear only one time in the map.

- A value may appear more than once in the map.

- The map can look things up only in one direction: given the key, return the value.  Because a value can appear more than once, it doesn't work the other way: for example, which planet has zero moons?


# Java's HashMap

There are several ways to make a map in Java.  Today we're going to use one named `java.util.HashMap` ([API docs](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/HashMap.html)).

You'll have to import it like this, or let IntelliJ do it for you.

```java
import java.util.HashMap;
```

Recall that with `ArrayList`, you have to tell Java the type of elements in angle brackets.  With `HashMap`, you have to tell Java the types of both the keys and the values.

```java
HashMap<String, Integer> numberOfMoons = new HashMap<String, Integer>();
```

The two types are the _key type_ and the _value type_, respectively.  In this case, the key type is `String` and the value type is `Integer`.

We now have an **empty** hash map, like a table with no entries.

| key = Planet | value = # Moons |
|:--|--:|

To look up an entry in a map, use the `get(key)` method.  Its argument is always the key type of the map (the first one in angle brackets).  Its return type is the value type of the map (the second one in angle brackets).

```java
Integer num = numberOfMoons.get("Neptune");
```

Our map is empty; it doesn't contain any keys at all.  So, the value is `null`.  But we can add values with the `put(key, value)` method.

```java
numberOfMoons.put("Mercury", 0);
numberOfMoons.put("Venus", 0);
numberOfMoons.put("Earth", 1);
numberOfMoons.put("Mars", 2);
```

After this, the table would look as follows:

| key = Planet | value = # Moons |
|:--|--:|
| Mercury | 0 |
| Venus | 0 |
| Earth | 1 | 
| Mars | 2 |

Since it contains keys and values, we can look up a key to obtain a value.

```java
Integer num = numberOfMoons.get("Earth");
System.out.println(num);
```

But any key other than one we've put in already returns null.

```java
System.out.println(numberOfMoons.get("Neptune"));
System.out.println(numberOfMoons.get("Sun"));
System.out.println(numberOfMoons.get("Texas"));
```


# Exercises
 
Please work through these exercises, completing as many as you can in class.  
 
1. **Finish moons:** Finish the hashmap of number of moons for each planet. 

1. **Moons as method:** Convert this to a _method_ that _returns_ this hashmap.  It should look like this:

  ```java
  public static HashMap<String, Integer> getNumberOfMoons() {
      // Write code here!
  }
  ```

1. **Is a planet:** One nice bonus of having this hashmap is that you can check whether a string is the name of a planet by checking whether that string is a key in the hashmap.  Write a method that does this:

  ```java
  public static boolean isPlanet(String name) {
      // Write code here!
  }
  ```

  Test your method on a few real and fake planet names.

1. **State capitals:** The lesson project contains a class named [`Capitals`](../../projects/2015-03-29/src/nyc/c4q/ac21/Capitals.java), with a method `getCapitals()` that returns a hashmap from state names to capitals.  In the `main()` method, write a program that prompts the user for a state name.  If the user enters a state name, print out,

  ```
  The capital of (state) is (capital).
  ```

  Otherwise, print out,

  ```
  (name) is not a state!
  ```

  Make sure you test your program on correct and incorrect state names.

1. **Map of word lengths:** Write a method that takes an array list of strings as a parameter, and creates and returns a hash map whose keys are the strings from the array and whose values are the lengths of these strings.

  ```java
  public static HashMap<String, Integer> getLengths(ArrayList<String> strings) {
      // Write code here!
  }
  ```

  For example, if you call it with an array containing "hello" and "goodbye", you'll get back a hash map with two keys: "hello" associated with the value 5, and "goodbye" associated with the value 7.

  Test it with code similar to this.

  ```java
  ArrayList<String> words = new ArrayList<String>();
  words.add("banana");
  words.add("pineapple");
  words.add("cantaloupe");

  HashMap<String, Integer> lengths = getLengths(words);
  System.out.println(lengths.get("banana"));      // should print 6
  System.out.println(lengths.get("cantaloupe"));  // should print 10
  System.out.println(lengths.get("broccoli"));    // should print null
  ```

1. **Count words:** Write a method that takes an array of words as a parameter, and creates and returns a hash map whose keys are all _unique_ words that appear in the list, and whose values are the _number of times_ each word appears.  

  See the [`WordCount`](../../projects/2015-03-29/src/nyc/c4q/ac21/WordCount.java) class for a skeleton.  This class also contains code that loads the text of Obama's 2014 State of the Union speech and divides it into words.

1. **(Bonus) Two lists make a map:**  Another way to represent a mapping is with the key and value columns in the tables shown above, using one `ArrayList` for the keys and one `ArrayList` for the columns.  

  For example, to represent the number of moons for each planet, the keys will be a `ArrayList<String>` containing Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, _etc._ and the values will be a `ArrayList<Integer>` containing 0, 0, 1, 2, _etc._  To look up the value for a key, first find the index of the key in the keys list, and then extract the corresponding index from the values list.

  The lesson project [`ListMap`](../../projects/2015-03-29/src/nyc/c4q/ac21/ListMap.java) contains a class named `ListMap`, which sets this up for you.  There are three methods for you to implement: one to put a key and value into the "map", one to look up a key, and one to remove a key and value.  The `main()` method contains tests: once you have implemented the other three methods correctly, all the tests should print "true"!

  Note: While this is a correct way to implement maps in Java, the reason we don't usually do it this way is because it is inefficient once there are many keys and values in the map.
